III. GENERAL ISSUES

The University of Nebraska-Lincoln is a comprehensive, land grant research university and thus has a unique set of responsibilities for instruction, research and service. The following general issues are directly related to these responsibilities and should be carefully considered when evaluating all elements of the University.

1. Support of the basic mission of instruction, research and service.
    The role and mission states that through its three primary missions of instruction, research,
    and service, UNL is the state's primary intellectual center providing leadership throughout
    the state through quality education and the generation of new knowledge.
2. Integration and Balance of Mission
    The University is committed to an effective integration of its primary functions of instruction,
    research and service. The university community supports the thesis that the quality of instruction
    and service is enhanced when faculty are also engaged in research and scholarship. Therefore, an
    appropriate balance of instruction, research and service should be maintained within the major
    academic units and the university at-large.
3. Primacy of Academic Programs
    Academic programs exist for the purpose of creating new knowledge, providing instruction and
    extending service. Primacy should therefore be accorded to maintaining and enhancing the quality
    of academic programs through talented faculty, students and staff.
4. Necessity of Support and Service Programs
    To fully and effectively use its human resources and achieve its mission, the University should
    provide effective support and service programs for students, faculty and staff and a supportive
    physical environment which includes buildings, equipment and infrastructure.

    Strong academic programs depend upon effective and efficient support functions to achieve the
    primary mission of the University. The evaluation of support and service programs should,
    therefore, be based primarily upon how they contribute to the performance and strength of
    academic programs, with consideration given especially to cost effectiveness and efficiency.

5. Academic Freedom and Tenure

    A university must support the principles of tenure and academic freedom. They help create a
    climate which engenders creative thought and unbridled expression. They serve the university
    by ensuring an environment necessary to attract and retain the best available faculty.

    Program reviews and subsequent reallocations, reductions, reorganizations and/or eliminations
    must not abrogate the principles of tenure, academic freedom, or due process which are essential
    to the stability, integrity, and excellence of the institution.

6. Affirmative Action

    The University of Nebraska-Lincoln has a demonstrable commitment to affirmative action and
    educational opportunities with particular focus on ethnic minorities and women, which should
    be continued into the future.

7. Relationship with the State and Society at Large

    The University enjoys a close relationship with the people of Nebraska and the larger society
    it serves. Indeed, the maintenance of UNL's excellence enhances the state's economy and overall
    quality of life. However, the emergence of a body of knowledge and new ideas should not be
    determined solely by the availability of external resources and the demands of clients.
    The University should retain its autonomy and the capacity to act as a constructive force
    within society at large.
